So for this final part,
I wanna talk to you about,
actually testing your application.
Now interestingly enough when
testing an application that
might have these complex flows
where you can add, delete a timer.
Go back and forth between clock and
timer, all of these different things.
You could test it in a model based
testing way using x date without
your application having to use x date.
So if we created this entire
application with basically whatever
we want to use, whether it's redox,
WebEx, recoil, or
any of these other,
reacts libraries for managing States.
It doesn't really matter we could
create model based tests for them.
So let me just go over what
a model-based test is.
In essence we have if you're familiar
with the given when then style of
testing you have given,
which is when the app is in this state.
And then you have the one part where
it's like when this event happens
in that state, then you're asserting that
the app should be in this other state.
So if you squint that sort of looks
like part of a state machine.
And indeed you could describe the behavior
of your application as a state machine.
So there isn't going to be an exercise for
this,
it's just something that
he wants to explain to you.
If we go to App.test.j s.
We're we have another machine over here.
This is called the testTimerAppMachine.
And looking at the flow of this machine,
we had our initial state of new timer.
And this is not going to be the same
machine that we use for the application.
And the reason for this is because
we want to create a machine
that describes the user's point of view.
And so you can imagine like going
to a restaurant and ordering food.
From your perspective,
you tell the waiter what you want.
And you see them go away and then maybe
20 minutes later you have your food.
So you might think okay,
those are the states you're ordering,
you're waiting and
then you're eating three states.
But in reality,
the implementation details of that
might be something a lot more complex.
The waiter has to go give
the order to the kitchen.
The kitchen has to make the order, and
then the waiter has to serve other tables.
A lot of things are happening
in between that waiting and
eating state, and
that might not be visible to the user.
So, yeah, we should be testing
from the perspective of of user.
And so that's what we're doing here.
If we look at the testTimerAppMachine
again in App.test.j s.
We have an initial state of new timer for
instance.
So if I reload this and go to complete,
that's what I see as a user
right now this new timer state.
And so I'm from here,
I could do two things.
I could change the value,
which is just entering a number here,
and then I could play.
Now as a user, I know that I could
only play, if I've changed something,
so I add a guarded transition
over here that says.
If the value is greater than zero,
only then can I go to the timer state and
then in the timer state I
could do a couple things.
I could delete this timer, or
I could add a new timer and
adding a timer takes me back
to this newTimer state.
So there's this a library?
Called x data test which allows
you to create a testing model.
Currently, it's called create model
where you pass in that machine,
and you specify what each
one of those events mean.
In this case, we're using react testing
library, which is an excellent library
in my opinion, better than enzyme for
testing react applications.
And so with react testing library,
I highly recommend you read the
documentation and look up how it works.
Because there's a lot of libraries
under the testing library umbrella for
view, or for spelt, or
even for just Raw DOM.
And so, for example,
to execute the change event.
We're telling this testing
model that executing it means
we're finding this input
that has a duration title.
And if you could see here, but
if you hover over this,you'll see
the duration title show up there.
And then we add 1,2,4 to the input.
This is just a random number
that I decided to put there.
And similarly the play event means
we're finding the add button.
By getting this starts whatever timer
button and then we're clicking it.
Delete means similarly we're
getting the delete button and
clicking it and add we're getting
the Add button and we're adding it.
Now you'll notice here we
describe the state machine.
And we described each of
the events over here.
So where are the actual tests?
Well, this model has this get
simple path plans that describe all
of the paths from the initial
states to every other states.
And it generates that for you.
And that's the basic idea
behind model based testing.
So if we look back at
our machine over here.
We could see that from the idle states,
there's a few paths that we could take.
We could go from idle to
running on the toggle event.
We could also go from idle
to running to paused or
we could go from idle to running
to paused to running again.
Or we could go from idle to running to
pause and then all the way to idle.
So there's many ways to you to go
about this machine or to traverse it.
A simple path is a path
that doesn't repeat states.
So it's not the shortest path.
But it is a path where, for example,
we go from A to B to C to D, but
never A to B to C to B to D.
Because we are not repeating
that these states.
So with react, sorry with XD tests,
you get those plans and
each plan has a description
which is generated for you.
And each testing plan has a path
And that path is basically
going from one state and
traversing these transitions
to another states.
And, in each of the tests,
we rendered the timer app and
then we test that rendered timer app.
There's a few articles on this by the way,
I'm just giving you
a brief overview of it.
The way that we test each state
is in the meta, test property.
We could say when we're in the state,
for example,
when we're in the new timer state,
we should see a newTimer or
something with data test id =new timer.
And this is going to throw an error by the
way, if it doesn't find that test id so.
So let's actually run these tests and
show you what the output is.
So if I run yarn test, It's going to be
calculating all of those simple paths.
And it's going to show a failure,
cannot find module complete timerApp,
that's completely unrelated.
So Let's just see what that's called.
It's called something else,
it's called EPP, so
we get EPP oops from app.
Okay, so you could see here that the be
tested didn't find that timerApp.
So we're going to this
is why testing is good.
The errors are expected.
All right.
So when the test runs, it's going to
generate in this case five simple paths.
So for instance, it says it reaches
state machines, new timers, no timers.
So it's saying that it reached that child,
no timer state,
which is actually a really trivial test.
That's basically testing.
Does it end up or when you load the app?
Is it on this screen?
Is it on this no timer screen?
And then there's this one.
We're testing it reaches date no timers,
with 124.
So basically it's saying
when we type in a value,
in this case 124, it should still
be on this no timers state, so
nothing should change which
Is exactly what happens.
And then we have reached a state timer,
which is saying that.
When we click Change, or
sorry when we do the change event,
which is typing 124 in here, and we click
play, we should be in the timer state.
So that's one of the paths
that's generated.
And then there's reaches state
new timer after deleted.
And so that's if we click or
if we change it, we play it,
and then we delete it while it's running.
It should be in this new timer state.
Now, the reason that we have
nested states over here is that.
If we,
let's say that we just go to new timer and
we don't have this after deleted.
So, go ahead and save that.
You're gonna notice that
it generates less tests and
it doesn't even test that delete events.
And that's because the model
based tests are seeing that,
we already been to the new timer state and
I already asserted it so
I don't want to visit it again.
So we could tell it that this
is actually a different state.
This is the new timer state
after a timer has been deleted.
So we're sort of giving it some nuance and
saying it shouldn't be the same
new timer states and so on.
So yeah, that's essentially
how model based testing works.
The more tests you add,
the more paths it could possibly generate.
There have been people who have
generated maybe hundreds or
thousands of tests from this.
But the idea is that your tests are auto
generated instead of manually specified.
And if any behavior In your app changes,
you change the machine, and
the tests all get updated.
So that's what model
based testing is about.